gRPC e-book Chapter 2 (#14303)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/grpc-for-wcf-developers/interface-definition-language.md

---
title: Interface Definition Language - gRPC for WCF Developers
description: Introducing the Protocol Buffers IDL
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# Interface Definition Language

> With WCF, services can expose description metadata using the Web Service Definition Language (WSDL), which is generated dynamically using .NET Reflection at runtime. Developers can use this metadata to generate clients for those services, potentially in other languages if a platform-neutral binding such as SOAP over HTTP is used.

Reviewer: Added note and link on server reflection at end of page.

gRPC uses the Interface Definition Language (IDL) from Protocol Buffers. The Protocol Buffers IDL is a custom, platform-neutral language with an open specification. Developers hand-code `.proto` files to describe services along with their inputs and outputs. These `.proto` files can then be used to generate language- or platform-specific stubs for clients and servers, allowing multiple different platforms to communicate. By sharing `.proto` files, teams can generate code to use each others' services without needing to take a code dependency.

One of the advantages of the Protobuf IDL is that as a custom language it enables gRPC to be completely language and platform agnostic, not favoring any technology over another.

The Protobuf IDL is also much easier for humans to both read and write than WSDL. Changing the WSDL of a WCF service typically requires making the changes to the service code itself, running the service and regenerating the WSDL file from the server. By contrast, with a `.proto` file, changes are simple to apply and automatically flow through the generated code immediately.

> When compared with XML, messages encoded using Protocol buffers have numerous advantages:

Reviewer 2: Disadvantage is messages are not human readable. Additional tooling and the proto file is required to debug message content.

> The Protobuf IDL is also designed for humans to both read and write, whereas WSDL is intended as a machine-readable/writable format. Changing the WSDL of a WCF service typically requires making the changes to the service code itself, running the service and regenerating the WSDL file from the server. By contrast, with a `.proto` file, changes are simple to apply and automatically flow through the generated code. Visual Studio 2019 builds `.proto` files in the background when they are saved; when using other editors such as VS Code the changes will be applied when the project is built.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Protobuf IDL is also designed for humans to both read and write, whereas WSDL is intended as a machine-readable/writable format. Changing the WSDL of a WCF service typically requires making the changes to the service code itself, running the service and regenerating the WSDL file from the server. By contrast, with a `.proto` file, changes are simple to apply with a text editor, and automatically flow through the generated code. Visual Studio 2019 builds `.proto` files in the background when they are saved; when using other editors such as VS Code the changes will be applied when the project is built.
```

> When compared with XML, and particularly SOAP, messages encoded using Protobuf have many advantages. Protobuf messages can be up to 10x smaller than the same data serialized as SOAP XML, and encoding, decoding and transmitting them over a network can be up to 100x faster.

Reviewer 3: @markrendle Can we remove references to actual numbers here? It's something we'd like to add back in later once we've measured it in a re-produce-able test. We're trying to avoid upsetting the applecart for folks already using WCF.

> When compared with XML, and particularly SOAP, messages encoded using Protobuf have many advantages. Protobuf messages can be up to 10x smaller than the same data serialized as SOAP XML, and encoding, decoding and transmitting them over a network can be up to 100x faster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When compared with XML, and particularly SOAP, messages encoded using Protobuf have many advantages. Protobuf messages tend to be smaller than the same data serialized as SOAP XML, and encoding, decoding and transmitting them over a network can be faster.
```

description: Introducing the Protocol Buffers IDL.
author: markrendle
ms.date: 09/02/2019
---

# Interface Definition Language

With WCF, services can expose description metadata using the Web Service Definition Language (WSDL), which is generated dynamically using .NET Reflection at runtime. Developers can use this metadata to generate clients for those services, potentially in other languages if a platform-neutral binding such as SOAP over HTTP is used.

gRPC uses the Interface Definition Language (IDL) from Protocol Buffers. The Protocol Buffers IDL is a custom, platform-neutral language with an open specification. Developers hand-code `.proto` files to describe services along with their inputs and outputs. These `.proto` files can then be used to generate language- or platform-specific stubs for clients and servers, allowing multiple different platforms to communicate. By sharing `.proto` files, teams can generate code to use each others' services without needing to take a code dependency.

One of the advantages of the Protobuf IDL is that as a custom language it enables gRPC to be completely language and platform agnostic, not favoring any technology over another.

> The Protobuf IDL is also much easier for humans to both read and write than WSDL. Changing the WSDL of a WCF service typically requires making the changes to the service code itself, running the service and regenerating the WSDL file from the server. By contrast, with a `.proto` file, changes are simple to apply and automatically flow through the generated code immediately.

Reviewer: Clarified.

When compared with XML, messages encoded using Protobuf have many advantages:

> - They can be up to 10x smaller.

Reviewer: I've got no specific reference, but the 10x is an estimate based on a test I did using a dataset with lists of records, where SOAP repeated opening and closing XML tags all over the place while Protobuf used its packed array format.

> The Protobuf IDL is also much easier for humans to both read and write than WSDL. Changing the WSDL of a WCF service typically requires making the changes to the service code itself, running the service and regenerating the WSDL file from the server. By contrast, with a `.proto` file, changes are simple to apply and automatically flow through the generated code. Visual Studio 2019 builds `.proto` files in the background when they are saved; when using other editors such as VS Code the changes will be applied when the project is built.

Reviewer 4: Would it be better to describe this as Protobug IDL is intended for humans to read and write whereas WSDL was intended to be read and written programatically?

> - They can be up to 10x smaller.

Reviewer 4: This isn't true when you use WCF's binary message encoding. The difference is only about 10% in size.

Reviewer 2: Just above this (line 18) the doc mentions that these comparisons are to WCF with XML.

I think it is worth discussing either there or below this list that WCF also supports more efficient binary messaging.

Reviewer: Added a note.

Reviewer 4: Binary encoding is XML, it's just a binary encoded version of xml.

Reviewer 4: Someone made a blog post and provided code comparing the different serializers and their formats including DataContractSerializer and protobuf among others. I forked their code and added a variant using the binary xml dictionary reader/writer. You can find my fork [here](https://github.com/mconnew/SerializationPerformanceTest_CSharp/tree/BinaryXml) on the BinaryXml branch.  

These are the results:  

**Simple Object**  

| Serializer | Object size | Serialization time | Deserialization time |
| ------------- | ------------- |------------- |------------- |
| DataContractSerializer (text) | 370 | 0.002255ms | 0.005327ms |
| DataContractSerializer (binary) | 83 | 0.000864ms | 0.002067ms |
| Protobuf | 62 | 0.000522ms | 0.001207 ms |

You can see with a simple object, even when using the text xml encoder (which NetTcp doesn't used by default) it's less than 6X bigger. When using the binary xml encoder, protobuf is only 1.33X smaller.

**Array of simple objects**  

| Serializer | Object size | Serialization time | Deserialization time |
| ------------- | ------------- |------------- |------------- |
| DataContractSerializer (text) | 364,299 | 2.431831ms | 4.770156ms |
| DataContractSerializer (binary) | 125,974 | 1.270527ms | 3.068528ms |
| Protobuf | 104,191 | 0.667872ms | 2.445094ms |

When serializing something significantly bigger, there's still nowhere near 10X. For an array of simply objects, when using the text xml encoder it's less than 3.5X bigger. When using the binary xml encoder, protobuf is only 1.21X smaller.

Remember, this is still using the DataContractSerializer so it's still XML, just in a binary form. But even if you are comparing to text, it's a lot less than 10X. I haven't even done anything to try and highlight the strengths of WCF. For example, if I were to enable references with the DataContractSerializer (removes duplicates objects from the output and replaces with a reference) and were to insert the exact same simple object in every position of the array, XML would come out significantly smaller than protobuf as protobuf can't do that.

> - Encoding, decoding and transmitting can be up to 100x faster.

Reviewer 4: This also isn't true. When using binary message encoding, WCF's encoding is about 10% slower than protobuf. Also any benchmarks comparing NetTcp with protobuf are showing WCF to be significantly faster.

Reviewer: I benchmarked NetTCP against gRPC and gRPC was faster and used less memory. https://visualrecode.com/blog/wcf-vs-grpc-round-2/

Reviewer 4: In your original [blog post](https://unwcf.com/posts/wcf-vs-grpc-round-2/) I listed some problems with your comparison where you were comparing apples to oranges. In your comment reply to me you said you believed neither scenario was using any encryption. WCF definitely was, so presuming gRPC wasn't using any encryption, that will make a massive difference. If gRPC is using encryption, it's using TLS whereas you are using Windows auth for WCF which translates to using NegotiateStream. This are different encryption mechanisms so there could be a difference in performance there. Also, you were running WCF using workstation GC and gRPC using server GC. This again can make a significant difference, especially for server scenarios. Workstation GC has a single heap that all processors have to contend with to get access to. It also means when you do need to do a GC pause, you have a single core doing the work instead of all your cores so pauses are longer.  
And if all those problems aren't enough, your own results with a hamstrung WCF only show grpc to be 1.11X faster, not 100X.

Reviewer: Look, I'm not an expert at configuring WCF to get the best performance, but to be fair, I'm not an expert at configuring gRPC to get the best performance either. They were both running on whatever their default settings were, which for gRPC is obviously HTTP/2 over TLS, I don't know what it is for NetTCP.

_Anyway_, it's irrelevant here because the comparison is not gRPC versus WCF-with-NetTCP-binding. It's Protobuf versus XML.

> **When compared with XML**, messages encoded using Protobuf have many advantages:
> 
> - They can be up to 10x smaller.
> - Encoding, decoding and transmitting can be up to 100x faster.

- Simpler and less ambiguous.

> - The generated data access classes are easier to use programmatically.

Reviewer 4: Are they? In what way? They are just classes. WCF has the added capability of being able to handle object graphs with cycles which gRPC can't do. You need to turn on the feature with WCF, but it can do it whereas gRPC can't. So WCF can handle application OM classes better than gRPC where you will sometimes need to create a specific Data OM to handle the protobuf limitations.

Reviewer 2: It has been a while since I touched WCF client APIs but I suspect configuration will be easier with gRPC since gRPC is more prescriptive. And I suspect streaming is much easier using gRPC .NET APIs than WCF APIs.

But yeah, being more specific would be good here.

Reviewer: Removed that bullet point. Also the one above which wasn't saying anything.

> The potential disadvantage of Protobuf is that, because the messages are not human readable, additional tooling is required to debug message content.

Reviewer 4: The primary use of WCF when used for RPC uses the binary message encoder so this is only true when using the text message encoder. Otherwise you have the same problems with WCF. Actually sometimes it can be worse as WCF has a session dictionary which requires you to have a copy of every message sent in the session prior to the one you are interested in to be able to guarantee you can debug the message content. So in some ways, even with tooling a protobuf message can be easier to deal with.
